| [home page](https://cmustudent.github.io/tswd-portfolio-templates/) | [visualizing debt](visualizing-government-debt) | [critique by design](critique-by-design) | [final project I](final-project-part-one) | [final project II](final-project-part-two) | [final project III](final-project-part-three) |

# The final data story
[Shorthand](https://carnegiemellon.shorthandstories.com/3333695b-81b2-4e6b-b4ff-3049c98d85bf/index.html)

# Changes made since Part II
In response to the feedback from Part II, I made several changes mostly focused on really honing in on my audience and what I wanted them to get from the story. It was recommended in the feedback that I think about how to frame this as a sort of "how to protest safely" guide for peers. I wanted to still be able to use the data and visualizations I'd originally been working on, but in making adjustments for the final story I decided to do less of a deep dive into the Minneapolis BLM protests and provide a few more slides and visualizations about Americans' sentiments towards protesting overall and clarified some of the language in the conclusion/calls to action. 

I also had to make a fairly large pivot in my story because as I actually got into the data from the FBI NIBRS database, I saw that my assumptions about the trends during the protests were completely wrong--arrests actually went down significantly during the peak of the protest movement in Minneapolis and St. Paul. I had also expected nonviolent crimes to increase (e.g. property crimes including vandalism, given the way media portrayed the protests) but the proportion of arrests that were violent crimes/crimes against persons went up significantly during the peak of the protests. I therefore had to pivot to discuss some of the ways in which the media's portrayal and how many people talked about the protests while they were happening were maybe not well-aligned with the reality, and why that may be the case. This prompted me to look into the actual police and government response to the BLM protests and see how disproportionate the police response was compared to other protest types. 

Evidently there were a lot of changes to my story, but I thought it was an interesting process to see the actual trends in the data and try to find a way to tie in additional context in a way that didn't make the story too complicated or hard to follow (hopefully!). 

## The audience
I stuck with my audience I identified in Part II, which is essentially my peers at Heinz as well as other people in my general age group who may be interested in social issues. These may be people who regularly attend protests, but more likely are people who might have interest in attending a protest but are concerned about how to do so safely, or maybe they believe in the causes of certain protests but haven't actually taken the next step to go out in person and participate in a demonstration. I find that many people I know, myself included, feel more comfortable being politically active on social media or through traditional channels like voting, but can be some shyness or stigma about showing up in person to a march especially because of concerns about safety and arrests. I think the pivot my story took ideally is even more successful at engaging these people, showing that most of the protests were peaceful and even with a disproportionate police response, the arrest numbers actually declined during the protests (at least for the data I looked at, which of course is limited and doesn't necessarily show a causal relationship).  

## Final design decisions
I stuck fairly closely to the visualizations I had sketched out in the fist iterations of the story. People seemed to respond well to them when I asked for feedback, and they seemed to be appopriate for what I was trying to show. I did add a couple visualizations including the bubble chart to show the relationships between frequency of word choice to describe the protests as well as another donut chart to show how many Americans had ever considered protesting. I also included a couple bar charts about the scale of police response and police use of force in BLM protests compared with other protest as I thought those data were interesting and i would be helpful to visualize to see the magnitude of the differences. 

I also kept to my color scheme for the story and the visualizations (black, white, and red). Again, the people I asked for feedback from responsed well to these design choices and said they felt appropriate to the story and message. I did swap out the copyrighted photos for free-usephotos from Unsplash--I was glad to find there were plenty of similar copyright-free images. 

## References
My references are included in the end of my Shorthand story. Some of the background information about George Floyd and the protests was based on my own memories and experiences--a combination of what I read in news outlets, read and saw on social media, and saw/participated in demonstrating in DC during the movement; therefore it is hard to cite specifically. 

# Final thoughts
I thought the iterative process was very useful--unsurprisingly, maybe, but still worth noting so that I internalize the value of multiple drafts, seeking feedback, etc. I do wish I had gotten into the data a little earlier and/or had more time to really get into it. I didn't realize until fairly close to the Part II deadline that the NIBRS data did not include a table where all state results were aggregated into US-level data. I had hoped to include a couple visualizations looking at overall US data during the protests to see how it compared with the Minneapolis/St. Paul data, but that would have required downloading, cleaning, and aggregating multiple tables from all 50 states to get it into a workable format--something I certainly could have done if I had managed my time better, but given time constraints hitting against the deadline I chose to focus just on Minneapolis-St. Paul. I think in the end, given the decisions about audience and the pivot in the main point of the story, this wouldn't have necessarily added much, but I think if I had taken the time to do that analysis there might have been interesting insights there. As a final reflection, I found myself frustrated with Tableau's design options (and/or my skill level with making it look the way I want it to). I felt it was best to work in Tableau when working with the NIBRS data (and actually tried but couldn't get it to work in datawrapper) but the look of the final graphs in Tableau isn't as polished as I wanted. I think the visualizations I designed in datawrapper were cleaner and visually fit better with the overall design of the Shorthand story, so the Tableau visualizations look a bit out of place. Something to keep working on, and maybe an incentive for me to explore other tools more seriously!
